<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!-- -*- DocBook -*- -->
<chapter id="ch-source">
<?dbhtml filename="ch-source.html" ?>
<title>Debian kernel source</title>
<section id="s-changes"><title>Changes to the pristine kernel source</title>
<para>
The kernels in Debian are distributed in binary form, built from the Debian
kernel source.  It is important to recognize that Debian kernel source may be
(and in most cases is) different from the upstream (or "pristine") kernel
source, distributed from <ulink
url="http://www.kernel.org">www.kernel.org</ulink> and its mirrors.  Due to
licensing restrictions, unclear license information, or failure to comply with
the Debian Free Software Guidelines (DFSG), parts of the kernel are removed in
order to distribute the source in the <literal>main</literal> section of the
Debian archive.  Such removal produces
<literal>linux_<replaceable>version</replaceable>.orig.tar.xz</literal> tarball,
which serves as the original upstream source.  <replaceable>version</replaceable> is
the actual upstream version.
</para>
<para>
The guidelines for firmware removal were set by the <ulink
url="http://www.debian.org/vote/2006/vote_007">Handling source-less firmware in
the Linux kernel</ulink> General Resolution and the <ulink
url="http://lists.debian.org/debian-kernel/2006/10/msg00541.html">position
statement</ulink> by the release managers.  Even though these documents
originally applied to the Etch release, there were no significant changes in
the removal policy, so they were in effect for the Lenny release as well.  As
of version 2.6.31-1, all known sourceless firmware has been removed from the
Debian package, but much of it is included in the <ulink
url="http://packages.debian.org/source/firmware-nonfree">firmware-nonfree</ulink>
package.  Additional information about firmware licensing and removals may be
found at the <ulink url="http://wiki.debian.org">Debian Wiki</ulink> page
<ulink
url="http://wiki.debian.org/KernelFirmwareLicensing">KernelFirmwareLicensing</ulink>.
</para>
</section>

<section id="s-patches"><title>Debian kernel patches</title>
<para>
The source from which the Debian binary kernels are built is obtained by taking
the source from
<literal>linux_<replaceable>version</replaceable>.orig.tar.xz</literal> (that is,
pristine kernel source with problematic parts removed) and applying a set of
Debian patches.  These patches typically implement essential fixes for serious
bugs and security holes.  The Debian version of the kernel packages has the
form <replaceable>version</replaceable><literal>-</literal><replaceable>revision</replaceable> where
<replaceable>version</replaceable> is the upstream version of the
kernel (like 3.2.20) and <replaceable>revision</replaceable>
determines the patchlevel.  For example, the packages with version 3.2.20-1 are
built from the <literal>linux_3.2.20.orig.tar.xz</literal> source, patched up
to patchlevel 1.  Certain packages include extra 'featuresets' not included in
the upstream source, such as <literal>rt</literal>.
</para>
</section>

<section id="s-acceptance"><title>Policy for patch acceptance</title>
<para>
The general policy of the Debian kernel team is that a patch must either fix a
bug or add hardware support, and must be based on a change already accepted by
the upstream kernel maintainers.  The change does not need to have been
included in an upstream release yet.  This policy allows the team to drop most
patches when moving to a new upstream version, rather than having to maintain
an increasing series of Debian-specific patches.  The recommended procedure for
inclusion of patches introducing optional features is to submit to the upstream
maintainer.
</para>
</section>

</chapter>

